Nullable reference type guidance for library and package authors (#13659)
dotnet/docs: docs/csharp/nullable-attributes.md

The addition of [nullable reference types](nullable-references.md) means you can declare for every variable whether or not a `null` value is allowed or expected. That provides a great experience as you write code.  You get warnings if a non-nullable variable might be set to `null`. You get warnings if a nullable variable is null-checked before you dereference it. Updating your libraries can take time, but the payoffs are worth it. The more information you provide the compiler about *when* a `null` value is allowed or prohibited, the better warnings users of your API will get. Let's start with a familiar example. Imagine your library has the following API to retrieve a resource string:

```csharp
bool TryGetMessage(string key, out string message)
```

The preceding example follows the familiar `Try*` pattern in .NET. There are two reference arguments for this API: the `key` and the `message` parameter. This API has the following rules relating to the nullness of these arguments:

- Callers shouldn't pass `null` as the argument for `key`.
- Callers can pass a variable whose value is `null` as the argument for `message`.

> - If the `TryGetMessage` method returns `true`, the value of `message` isn't null. If the return value is `false,` the value of `message` (and its null state) is unchanged.

Author: good point.

1. Enable nullable types for the entire project by adding the `<Nullable>enable</Nullable>` element to your *csproj* files. 
1. Remove the `#nullable enable` pragmas, as they're no longer needed.

This second strategy has less work up-front. The tradeoff is that the first task when you create a new file is to add the pragma and make it nullable aware. If any developers on your team forget, that new code is now in the backlog of work to make all code nullable aware.

Which of these strategies you pick depends on how much active development is taking place in your project. The more mature and stable your project, the better the second strategy. The more active features are being developed, the better the first strategy.

## Should nullable warnings introduce breaking changes?

Before you enable nullable reference types, variables are considered *nullable oblivious*. Once you enable nullable reference types, all those variables are *non-nullable*. The compiler will issue warnings if those variables aren't initialized to non-null values.

Another likely source of warnings is return values when the value hasn't been initialized.

> The first step is to use `?` annotations on parameters and return types to indicate when arguments or return values may be null, or must not be null. As you do this, your goal isn't just to fix warnings. The more important goal is to make the compiler understand your intent for potential null values. As you examine the warnings, you reach your next major decision for your library. Do you want to consider modifying API signatures to more clearly communicate your design intent? A better API signature for the `TryGetMessage` method examined earlier could be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first step in addressing the compiler warnings is to use `?` annotations on parameters and return types to indicate when arguments or return values may be null, or must not be null. As you do this, your goal isn't just to fix warnings. The more important goal is to make the compiler understand your intent for potential null values. As you examine the warnings, you reach your next major decision for your library. Do you want to consider modifying API signatures to more clearly communicate your design intent? A better API signature for the `TryGetMessage` method examined earlier could be:
```
I removed the comma, which doesn't belong if "or must not be null" applies to using ? annotations, though I don't think that's really the correct change. It is if the ? annotation indicates that a parameter or return type must not be null -- but a nullable type indicates that it may be null.

Author: I split this into two sentences to be more clear.

```csharp
string? TryGetMessage(string key);
```

> The return value indicates success or failure, and carries the value if the value was found. In many cases, changing API signatures can improve how they communicate null values.

Author: No, it's a good one: If you were designing a new API now, you'd use the `string? TryGetValue(string)` signature. But, we have lots of existing code that uses the `Try*` pattern. Readers will need to decide what's right for their library.

> However, for public libraries, or libraries with large user bases, you may prefer not introducing any API signature changes. For those cases, and other common patterns, you can apply attributes to more clearly define when an argument or return value may be `null`. Whether or not you consider changing the surface of your API, you'll likely find that type annotations alone aren't sufficient for describing when `null` values for arguments or return values. In those instances, you can apply attributes to more clearly describe an API. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, for public libraries, or libraries with large user bases, you may prefer not introducing any API signature changes. For those cases, and other common patterns, you can apply attributes to more clearly define when an argument or return value may be `null`. Whether or not you consider changing the surface of your API, you'll likely find that type annotations alone aren't sufficient for describing `null` values for arguments or return values. In those instances, you can apply attributes to more clearly describe an API. 
```

## Attributes extend type annotations

> several attributes have been added to express further information about the null state of variables. All code you wrote before C# 8 introduced nullable reference types was *null oblivious*. That means any reference type variable may be null, but null checks aren't required. Once your code is *nullable aware*, those rules change. Reference types should never be the `null` value, and nullable reference types must be checked against null before being dereferenced.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Several attributes have been added to express further information about the null state of variables. All code you wrote before C# 8 introduced nullable reference types was *null oblivious*. That means any reference type variable may be null, but null checks aren't required. Once your code is *nullable aware*, those rules change. Reference types should never be the `null` value, and nullable reference types must be checked against null before being dereferenced.
```

> Several attributes have been added to express further information about the null state of variables. All code you wrote before C# 8 introduced nullable reference types was *null oblivious*. That means any reference type variable may be null, but null checks aren't required. Once your code is *nullable aware*, those rules change. Reference types should never be the `null` value, and nullable reference types must be checked against null before being dereferenced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Several attributes have been added to express additional information about the null state of variables. All code you wrote before C# 8 introduced nullable reference types was *null oblivious*. That means any reference type variable may be null, but null checks aren't required. Once your code is *nullable aware*, those rules change. Reference types should never be the `null` value, and nullable reference types must be checked against `null` before being dereferenced.
```

> The rules for your APIs are likely more complicated, as you saw wit the `TryGetValue` API scenario. Many of your APIs have more complex rules for when variables can or can't be `null`. In these cases, you'll use one of these attributes to express those rules:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The rules for your APIs are likely more complicated, as you saw with the `TryGetValue` API scenario. Many of your APIs have more complex rules for when variables can or can't be `null`. In these cases, you'll use one of these attributes to express those rules:
```

> - `AllowNull`: A non-nullable input argument may be null.

Reviewer 2: It might be worth mentioning that these descriptions may sound odd at first, but will be explained later on. Since the rationale for their behavior is pretty complicated, it may even be better to recap each kind of attribute "family" with this at the end.

Author: Great suggestion

> - `AllowNull`: A non-nullable input argument may be null.

Reviewer 3: Can you use these even when `<Nullable>` was not explicitly set to `enable`? Or do this only take effect when it's turned on? I would assume that you can use them at any time, but I'm not sure.

Author: You can use them, but they will be ignored. I don't think that's worth adding, do you?

Reviewer 3: If that is the case then I would mention that you have to be in nullable-aware context to use this stuff and if your application (default) is in nullable-unaware, these are ignored. To me it seemed that these attributes can be used anytime anywhere because it just enhances the compiler

- `DisallowNull`: A nullable input argument should never be null.
- `MaybeNull`: A non-nullable return value may be null.
- `NotNull`: A nullable return value will never be null.
- `MaybeNullWhen`: A non-nullable `out` or `ref` argument may be null when the return value satisfies a condition.
- `NotNullWhen`: A nullable `out` or `ref` argument may not be null when the return value satisfies a condition.

> - `NotNullIfNotNull`: a string return value isn't null when the input string argument isn't null.

Reviewer: Perhaps link to the attributte? You can suppress the display of Attribute in the text with \[DisallowNull](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.DisallowNullAttribute), for example.

Adding these rules attributes gives the compiler more information about the rules for your API. The compiler will warn callers when they violate those rules. These attributes don't enable additional checks on your implementation.

## Specify Preconditions: `AllowNull` and `DisallowNull`

> Consider a read / write property that never returns `null` because it has a reasonable default value. Callers pass `null` to the set accessor when set it to that default value. For example, consider a messaging system that asks for a screen name in a chat room. If none is provided, the system generates a random name:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider a read / write property that never returns `null` because it has a reasonable default value. Callers pass `null` to the set accessor when setting it to that default value. For example, consider a messaging system that asks for a screen name in a chat room. If none is provided, the system generates a random name:
```

The preceding example demonstrates what to look for when adding the `AllowNull` attribute on an argument:

1. The general contract for that variable is that it shouldn't be `null`, so you want a non-nullable reference type.
1. There are scenarios for the input variable to be `null`, though they aren't the most common usage.

Most often you'll need this attribute for properties, or `in` `out` and `ref` arguments. The `AllowNull` attribute is the best choice when a variable is typically non-null, but you need to allow `null` as a precondition.

Contrast that with scenarios for using `DisallowNull`: You use this attribute to specify that an input variable of a nullable type shouldn't be `null`. Consider a property where `null` is the default value, but clients can only set it to a non-null value. Consider the following code:

```csharp
public string ReviewComment // Comments can be set, but not cleared.
{
    get { return _comment;}
    set
    {
        if (value == null) throw new ArgumentNullException(nameof(value), "Cannot set to null");

>         _comment = null;

Reviewer 3: I think you may be setting it to `null` as a way to let the `_comment` variable become `null`, but that really is just confusing as it's not realistic and I'm sure you'll get comments on it. What about just setting the initial value to null or providing a simple `public void Reset() => _comment = null` method?

```suggestion
        _comment = value;
```

    }
}
string _comment;
```

The preceding code is the best way to express your design that the `ReviewComment` could be `null`, but can't be set to `null`. Once this code is nullable aware, you can express this concept more clearly to callers using the <xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.DisallowNull?displayProperty=nameWithType>:

```csharp
[DisallowNull] 
public string? ReviewComment // Comments can be added, but not removed.
{
    get { return _comment;}
    set
    {
        if (value == null) throw new ArgumentNullException(nameof(value), "Cannot set to null");

>         _comment = null;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        _comment = value;
```

    }
}
string? _comment;
```

> In a nullable context, the preceding code warns callers that the `ReviewComment` could be `null`, so it must be checked before access. Furthermore, it warns callers that, even though it could be `null`, callers shouldn't explicitly set it to `null`. The `DisallowNull` attribute also specifies a *pre-condition*, it does not affect the `get` accessor. You should choose to use the `DisallowNull` attribute when you observe these characteristics about:

Reviewer 3: I don't follow why the preceding code warns callers that the `ReviewComment` could be `null`?

Author: Updated the text.

1. The variable could be `null` in core scenarios, often when first instantiated.
1. The variable shouldn't be explicitly set to `null`.

These situations are common in code that was originally *null oblivious*. It may be that object properties are set in two distinct initialization operations. It may be that some properties are set only after some asynchronous work has completed.

The `AllowNull` and `DisallowNull` attributes enable you to specify that preconditions on variables may not match the nullable annotations on those variables. These provide more detail about the characteristics of your API. This additional information helps callers use your API correctly.

## Specify post-conditions: `MaybeNull` and `NotNull`

Suppose you have a method with the following signature:

```csharp
public Customer FindCustomer(string lastName, string firstName)
```

> You've likely written a method like this to return `null` when the name sought wasn't found. The `null` clearly indicates that the record wasn't found. In this example, you'd likely change the return type from `Customer` to `Customer?`. Instead, suppose it was a generic method like the following code:

Reviewer 3: Why would I likely have changed it to `Customer?`? 

Also, I don't like the changing of the example below to `Find` instead of `FindCustomer`. It makes it feel like the introduction of `FindCustomer` was pointless. Maybe continue with `FindCustomer` and use the `return: MaybeNull` on it?

Author: The problem is that `T?` doesn't work. That's covered later. I added text to allude to that fact.

```csharp
[return: MaybeNull]
public T Find<T>(IEnumerable<T> sequence, Func<T, bool> match)
```

The preceding code informs callers that the contract implies a non-nullable type, but the return value *may* actually be null.  Use the `MaybeNull` attribute when your API should be a non-nullable type, typically a generic type parameter, but there may be instances where `null` would be returned.

You can also specify that a return, or an `out` or `ref` argument isn't null even though the type is a nullable type. Consider a method that ensures an `Array` is large enough to hold a number of elements. If the input argument doesn't have capacity, the routine would allocate a new array and copy all the existing elements into it. If the input argument is `null`, the routine would allocate new storage. If there's sufficient capacity, the routine does nothing:

```csharp
public void EnsureCapacity<T>(ref T[] storage, int size)
```

You could call this routine as follows:

```csharp
// messages has the default value (null) when EnsureCapacity is called:
EnsureCapacity<string>(ref messages, 10);
// messages is not null.
EnsureCapacity<string>(messages, 50);
```

> After enabling null reference types, you want to  ensure that the preceding code compiles without warnings. When the method returns, the `storage` argument is guaranteed to be not null. However, it's acceptable to call `EnsureCapacity` with a null reference. You can make `storage` a nullable reference type, and add the `NotNull` post-condition to the parameter declaration:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After enabling null reference types, you want to ensure that the preceding code compiles without warnings. When the method returns, the `storage` argument is guaranteed to be not null. However, it's acceptable to call `EnsureCapacity` with a null reference. You can make `storage` a nullable reference type, and add the `NotNull` post-condition to the parameter declaration:
```

```csharp
public void EnsureCapacity<T>([NotNull]ref T[]? storage, int size)
```

The preceding code expresses the existing contract very clearly: Callers can pass a variable with the `null` value, but the return value is guaranteed to never be null. The `NotNull` attribute is most useful for `ref` and `out` arguments where `null` may be passed as an argument, but that argument is guaranteed to be not null when the method returns.

## Specify conditional post-conditions: `NotNullWhen` and `MaybeNullWhen`

> You're likely familiar with the `string` method <xref:System.String.IsNullOrEmpty(string)?DisplayProperty=nameWithType>. This method returns `true` when the argument isn't null, and not the empty string. Callers shouldn't need to null-check the argument if the method returns `false`. To make a method like this nullable aware, you'd set the argument to a nullable type, and add the `NotNullWhen` attribute:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You're likely familiar with the `string` method <xref:System.String.IsNullOrEmpty(string)?DisplayProperty=nameWithType>. This method returns `true` when the argument isn't `null` or an empty string. Callers shouldn't need to null-check the argument if the method returns `false`. To make a method like this nullable aware, you'd set the argument to a nullable type, and add the `NotNullWhen` attribute:
```

```csharp

> bool IsNullOrEmpty([NotNullWhen(false)]string? value);

Reviewer 3: Should this be on the return?

```csharp
[return: NotNullWhen("false")]
bool IsNullOrEmpty(string? value);
```

If not, then something isn't clicking for me since the return value is what is checked on the `if` test below but the attribute is specified on the input argument?

---
**UPDATE**
OK thinking and reading more below is it possible that the next paragraph is actually what threw me off? Why is it that when the return value as `false` would indicate that null wouldn't need to be checked? The compiler wouldn't know if false or true is being returned would it? That is a run-time check.

Author: Thanks for noting this. I added more explanation. It is a tough concept.

```csharp
string? userInput = GetUserInput();
if (!(string.IsNullOrEmpty(userInput))
{
   int messageLength = userInput.Length; // no null check needed.
}
// null check needed on userInput here.
```

The <xref:System.String.IsNullOrEmpty(string)?DisplayProperty=nameWithType> method will be annotated as shown above for .NET Core 3.0. You may have similar methods in your codebase that checks the state of objects for null values. The compiler won't recognize custom null check methods, and you'll need to add the annotations yourself.

Another use for these attributes is the `Try*` pattern. The postconditions for `ref` and `out` variables are communicated through the return value. Consider this method shown earlier:

```csharp
bool TryGetMessage(string key, out string message)
```

The preceding method follows a typical .NET idiom: the return value indicates if `message` was set or not. If the method returns `true`, the value isn't null, `false`, and the method didn't set `message`.

You can communicate that idiom using the `NotNullWhen` attribute. When you update the signature for nullable reference types, make `message` and `string?` and add an attribute:

```csharp

> bool TryGetMessage(string key, [NotNullWhen(true)out string? message)

Reviewer 4: Missing a closing `]`

```

In the preceding example, the value of `message` is known to be not null when `TryGetMessage` returns true.  You should annotate similar methods in your codebase in the same way: the arguments could be `null`, and are known to be not null when the method returns `true`.

> There's one final attribute you may also need. Some methods manipulate string arguments. These methods will return a non-null string whenever the argument isn't null. To correctly annotate these methods, you use the `NotNullIfNotNull` attribute. Consider the following method:

Author: The `NotNullWhenNotNull(string)`  attribute isn't available in Visual Studio 16.2. Should I remove this section for now?

Reviewer 2: I think it's fine to keep. By the time any of this is actually released, 16.2 will be unsupported and people will need to roll forward to 16.3.

> There's one final attribute you may also need. Some methods manipulate string arguments. These methods will return a non-null string whenever the argument isn't null. To correctly annotate these methods, you use the `NotNullIfNotNull` attribute. Consider the following method:

Reviewer 2: > Some methods manipulate string arguments.

I think strings are unrelated here. The core desire here is to have the output nullness be determined by the input nullness - if the input is nonnull, then the output should also be nonnull. This doesn't need to be a string, it could be any other data type where you want to have this kind of relationship

Author: Thanks. I mis-interpreted this badly. Updated.

```csharp
string GetTopLevelDomainFromFullUrl(string url);
```

> If the `url` argument isn't null, the output isn't `null`. You would annotate this method as the following code:

Reviewer 2: The way I do this in my blog post, if you think it's helpful, is I modify the signature to be all NRT. But then I mention that I want to maintain a relationship and not force callers to check for `null` if that relationship holds. That's where the attribute comes in.

```csharp

> [return: NotNullWhenNotNull("url")]

Reviewer 4: `NotNullIfNotNull`

---
title: Upgrade APIs with attributes to define null expectations
description: This article explains the motivations and techniques for adding descriptive attributes to describe the null state of arguments and return values from APIs
ms.date: 07/31/2019
---
# Update libraries to use nullable reference types and communicate nullable rules to callers.

The addition of [nullable reference types](nullable-references.md) means you can declare whether or not a `null` value is allowed or expected for every variable. That provides a great experience as you write code.  You get warnings if a non-nullable variable might be set to `null`. You get warnings if a nullable variable is null-checked before you dereference it. Updating your libraries can take time, but the payoffs are worth it. The more information you provide the compiler about *when* a `null` value is allowed or prohibited, the better warnings users of your API will get. Let's start with a familiar example. Imagine your library has the following API to retrieve a resource string:

```csharp
bool TryGetMessage(string key, out string message)
```

> The preceding example follows the familiar `Try*` pattern in .NET. There are two reference arguments for this API: the `key` and the `message` parameter. This API has the following rules relating to the nullness of these arguments:

Author: Thanks (I continue to reverse these terms).

## Attributes extend type annotations

Several attributes have been added to express additional information about the null state of variables. All code you wrote before C# 8 introduced nullable reference types was *null oblivious*. That means any reference type variable may be null, but null checks aren't required. Once your code is *nullable aware*, those rules change. Reference types should never be the `null` value, and nullable reference types must be checked against `null` before being dereferenced.

The rules for your APIs are likely more complicated, as you saw with the `TryGetValue` API scenario. Many of your APIs have more complex rules for when variables can or can't be `null`. In these cases, you'll use one of these attributes to express those rules:

> - [AllowNull](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.DisallowNullAttribute): A non-nullable input argument may be null.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- [AllowNull](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.AllowNullAttribute): A non-nullable input argument may be null.
```

> - [DisallowNull](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.AllowNullAttribute): A nullable input argument should never be null.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- [DisallowNull](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.DisallowNullAttribute): A nullable input argument should never be null.
```

- [NotNullIfNotNull](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.NotNullIfNotNullAttribute): a string return value isn't null when the input string argument isn't null.

The preceding descriptions are a quick reference to what each attribute does. Each following section describes the behavior and meaning more thoroughly.

Adding these rules attributes gives the compiler more information about the rules for your API. When calling code is compiled in a nullable enabled context, the compiler will warn callers when they violate those rules. These attributes don't enable additional checks on your implementation.

## Specify Preconditions: `AllowNull` and `DisallowNull`

Consider a read / write property that never returns `null` because it has a reasonable default value. Callers pass `null` to the set accessor when setting it to that default value. For example, consider a messaging system that asks for a screen name in a chat room. If none is provided, the system generates a random name:

```csharp
public string ScreenName
{
   get => screenName;
   set => screenName = value ?? GenerateRandomScreenName();
}
private string screenName;
```

> When you compile the preceding code in a nullable oblivious context, everything is fine. Once you enable nullable reference types, the `ScreenName` property becomes a non-nullable reference. That's correct for the `get` accessor: it never returns `null`. Callers don't need to check the returned property for `null`. But now setting the property to `null` generates a warning. In order to continue to support this type of code, you add the <xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.AllowNullAttribute?displayProperty=nameWithType> attribute to the `set` accessor, as shown in the following code: 

Reviewer 5: The paragraph after the code explains that the attribute would be applied only to the `set` accessor. However, it's added to the property:
```suggestion
When you compile the preceding code in a nullable oblivious context, everything is fine. Once you enable nullable reference types, the `ScreenName` property becomes a non-nullable reference. That's correct for the `get` accessor: it never returns `null`. Callers don't need to check the returned property for `null`. But now setting the property to `null` generates a warning. In order to continue to support this type of code, you add the <xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.AllowNullAttribute?displayProperty=nameWithType> attribute to the property, as shown in the following code: 
```

```csharp
[AllowNull]
public string ScreenName
{
   get => screenName;
   set => screenName = value ?? GenerateRandomScreenName();
}
private string screenName = GenerateRandomScreenName();
```

You may need to add a `using` directive for <xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis> to use this and other attributes discussed in this article. The attribute is applied to the property, not the `set` accessor. The `AllowNull` attribute specifies *pre-conditions*, and only applies to inputs. The `get` accessor has a return value, but no input arguments. Therefore, the `AllowNull` attribute only applies to the `set` accessor.

The preceding example demonstrates what to look for when adding the `AllowNull` attribute on an argument:

1. The general contract for that variable is that it shouldn't be `null`, so you want a non-nullable reference type.
1. There are scenarios for the input variable to be `null`, though they aren't the most common usage.

> Most often you'll need this attribute for properties, or `in` `out` and `ref` arguments. The `AllowNull` attribute is the best choice when a variable is typically non-null, but you need to allow `null` as a precondition.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Most often you'll need this attribute for properties, or `in`, `out`, and `ref` arguments. The `AllowNull` attribute is the best choice when a variable is typically non-null, but you need to allow `null` as a precondition.
```

Contrast that with scenarios for using `DisallowNull`: You use this attribute to specify that an input variable of a nullable type shouldn't be `null`. Consider a property where `null` is the default value, but clients can only set it to a non-null value. Consider the following code:

```csharp

> public string ReviewComment // Comments can be set, but not cleared.

Reviewer 5: The introduction paragraph provides a good explanation to make this code comment "omittable". Also, one might nit-pick that comments can be cleared by passing the empty string.
```suggestion
public string ReviewComment
```

{
    get => _comment;

>     set

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    set => _comment = value ?? throw new ArgumentNullException(nameof(value), "Cannot set to null");
```

>     {

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

>         if (value == null) throw new ArgumentNullException(nameof(value), "Cannot set to null");

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

>         _comment = value;

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

>     }

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

}
string _comment;
```

The preceding code is the best way to express your design that the `ReviewComment` could be `null`, but can't be set to `null`. Once this code is nullable aware, you can express this concept more clearly to callers using the <xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.DisallowNullAttribute?displayProperty=nameWithType>:

```csharp
[DisallowNull] 

> public string? ReviewComment // Comments can be added, but not removed.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
public string? ReviewComment
```

{
    get => _comment;

>     set => _comment = value ?? throw new ArgumentNullException(nameof(value), "Cannot set to null");;

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    set => _comment = value ?? throw new ArgumentNullException(nameof(value), "Cannot set to null");
```

>     }

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

}
string? _comment;
```

> In a nullable context, the `ReviewComment` `get` accessor could return the default value of `null`. The compiler ensures that it must be checked before access. Furthermore, it warns callers that, even though it could be `null`, callers shouldn't explicitly set it to `null`. The `DisallowNull` attribute also specifies a *pre-condition*, it does not affect the `get` accessor. You should choose to use the `DisallowNull` attribute when you observe these characteristics about:

Reviewer 5: "compiler ensures that it must be checked" might be understood as (1) "compiler adds the check"  or (2) the code wouldn't compile if there is no check
```suggestion
In a nullable context, the `ReviewComment` `get` accessor could return the default value of `null`. The compiler warns that it must be checked before access. Furthermore, it warns callers that, even though it could be `null`, callers shouldn't explicitly set it to `null`. The `DisallowNull` attribute also specifies a *pre-condition*, it does not affect the `get` accessor. You should choose to use the `DisallowNull` attribute when you observe these characteristics about:
```

1. The variable could be `null` in core scenarios, often when first instantiated.
1. The variable shouldn't be explicitly set to `null`.

These situations are common in code that was originally *null oblivious*. It may be that object properties are set in two distinct initialization operations. It may be that some properties are set only after some asynchronous work has completed.

The `AllowNull` and `DisallowNull` attributes enable you to specify that preconditions on variables may not match the nullable annotations on those variables. These provide more detail about the characteristics of your API. This additional information helps callers use your API correctly. Remember you specify preconditions using the following attributes:

> - [AllowNull](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.DisallowNullAttribute): A non-nullable input argument may be null.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- [AllowNull](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.AllowNullAttribute): A non-nullable input argument may be null.
```

> - [DisallowNull](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.AllowNullAttribute): A nullable input argument should never be null.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- [DisallowNull](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.DisallowNullAttribute): A nullable input argument should never be null.
```

For reasons covered under [Generic definitions and nullability](#generic-definitions-and-nullability) that technique does not work with generic methods. You may have a generic method that follows a similar pattern:

```csharp
public T Find<T>(IEnumerable<T> sequence, Func<T, bool> match)
```

You can't specify that the return value is `T?`. The method returns `null` when the sought item isn't found. Since you can't declare a `T?` return type, you add the `MaybeNull` annotation to the method return:

```csharp
[return: MaybeNull]
public T Find<T>(IEnumerable<T> sequence, Func<T, bool> match)
```

The preceding code informs callers that the contract implies a non-nullable type, but the return value *may* actually be null.  Use the `MaybeNull` attribute when your API should be a non-nullable type, typically a generic type parameter, but there may be instances where `null` would be returned.

> You can also specify that a return, or an `out` or `ref` argument isn't null even though the type is a nullable type. Consider a method that ensures an `Array` is large enough to hold a number of elements. If the input argument doesn't have capacity, the routine would allocate a new array and copy all the existing elements into it. If the input argument is `null`, the routine would allocate new storage. If there's sufficient capacity, the routine does nothing:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
You can also specify that a return value or an `out` or `ref` argument isn't null even though the type is a nullable type. Consider a method that ensures an array is large enough to hold a number of elements. If the input argument doesn't have capacity, the routine would allocate a new array and copy all the existing elements into it. If the input argument is `null`, the routine would allocate new storage. If there's sufficient capacity, the routine does nothing:
```

```csharp
public void EnsureCapacity<T>(ref T[] storage, int size)
```

You could call this routine as follows:

```csharp
// messages has the default value (null) when EnsureCapacity is called:
EnsureCapacity<string>(ref messages, 10);
// messages is not null.
EnsureCapacity<string>(messages, 50);
```

After enabling null reference types, you want to ensure that the preceding code compiles without warnings. When the method returns, the `storage` argument is guaranteed to be not null. However, it's acceptable to call `EnsureCapacity` with a null reference. You can make `storage` a nullable reference type, and add the `NotNull` post-condition to the parameter declaration:

```csharp
public void EnsureCapacity<T>([NotNull]ref T[]? storage, int size)
```

> The preceding code expresses the existing contract very clearly: Callers can pass a variable with the `null` value, but the return value is guaranteed to never be null. The `NotNull` attribute is most useful for `ref` and `out` arguments where `null` may be passed as an argument, but that argument is guaranteed to be not null when the method returns. You specify unconditional postconditions using the following attributes:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The preceding code expresses the existing contract very clearly: Callers can pass a variable with the `null` value, but the return value is guaranteed to never be null. The `NotNull` attribute is most useful for `ref` and `out` arguments where `null` may be passed as an argument, but that argument is guaranteed to be not null when the method returns.

You specify unconditional postconditions using the following attributes:
```

- [MaybeNull](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.MaybeNullAttribute): A non-nullable return value may be null.
- [NotNull](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.NotNullAttribute): A nullable return value will never be null.

## Specify conditional post-conditions: `NotNullWhen` and `MaybeNullWhen`

You're likely familiar with the `string` method <xref:System.String.IsNullOrEmpty(System.String)?DisplayProperty=nameWithType>. This method returns `true` when the argument isn't null, and not the empty string. It is a form of null-check: Callers don't need to null-check the argument if the method returns `false`. To make a method like this nullable aware, you'd set the argument to a nullable type, and add the `NotNullWhen` attribute:

```csharp
bool IsNullOrEmpty([NotNullWhen(false)]string? value);
```

> That informs the compiler that any code where the return value is `false` need not be checked. The addition of the attribute informs the compiler's static analysis that `IsNullOrEmpty` performs the necessary null check: It returns `false` when the input argument is not `null`.

Reviewer 5: In the last sentence the logic direction should be inverted. When input argument is an empty string (not `null`), it also returns `false`. However, if it returns 'false', we know that the input argument is not `null`:
```suggestion
That informs the compiler that any code where the return value is `false` need not be null-checked. The addition of the attribute informs the compiler's static analysis that `IsNullOrEmpty` performs the necessary null check: when it returns `false`, the input argument is not `null`.
```

```csharp
string? userInput = GetUserInput();
if (!(string.IsNullOrEmpty(userInput))
{
   int messageLength = userInput.Length; // no null check needed.
}
// null check needed on userInput here.
```

> The <xref:System.String.IsNullOrEmpty(System.String)?DisplayProperty=nameWithType> method will be annotated as shown above for .NET Core 3.0. You may have similar methods in your codebase that checks the state of objects for null values. The compiler won't recognize custom null check methods, and you'll need to add the annotations yourself. When you add the attribute, the compiler's static analysis knows when the tested variable has been null checked.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The <xref:System.String.IsNullOrEmpty(System.String)?DisplayProperty=nameWithType> method will be annotated as shown above for .NET Core 3.0. You may have similar methods in your codebase that check the state of objects for null values. The compiler won't recognize custom null check methods, and you'll need to add the annotations yourself. When you add the attribute, the compiler's static analysis knows when the tested variable has been null checked.
```

Another use for these attributes is the `Try*` pattern. The postconditions for `ref` and `out` variables are communicated through the return value. Consider this method shown earlier:

```csharp
bool TryGetMessage(string key, out string message)
```

> The preceding method follows a typical .NET idiom: the return value indicates if `message` was set or not. If the method returns `true`, the value isn't null; `false`, and the method didn't set `message`.

Reviewer 5: If the `message` was assigned some value before the call, that value would be cleared with `null` if the method returns `false`, so the `message` is always set:
```suggestion
The preceding method follows a typical .NET idiom: the return value indicates if `message` was set to the found value or, if no message is found, to the default value. If the method returns `true`, the value of `message` isn't null; otherwise, the method sets `message` to null.
```

You can communicate that idiom using the `NotNullWhen` attribute. When you update the signature for nullable reference types, make `message` a `string?` and add an attribute:

```csharp
bool TryGetMessage(string key, [NotNullWhen(true)] out string? message)
```

> In the preceding example, the value of `message` is known to be not null when `TryGetMessage` returns true.  You should annotate similar methods in your codebase in the same way: the arguments could be `null`, and are known to be not null when the method returns `true`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In the preceding example, the value of `message` is known to be not null when `TryGetMessage` returns `true`. You should annotate similar methods in your codebase in the same way: the arguments could be `null`, and are known to be not null when the method returns `true`.
```

There's one final attribute you may also need. Sometimes the null state of a return value depends on the null state of one or more input arguments. These methods will return a non-null value whenever certain input arguments aren't `null`. To correctly annotate these methods, you use the `NotNullIfNotNull` attribute. Consider the following method:

```csharp
string GetTopLevelDomainFromFullUrl(string url);
```

> If the `url` argument isn't null, the output isn't `null`. Once nullable references are enabled, that signature works correctly, provided your API never accepts a null input. However, if the input could be null, then then return value could also be null. Therefore, you could change the signature to the following code:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If the `url` argument isn't null, the output isn't `null`. Once nullable references are enabled, that signature works correctly, provided your API never accepts a null input. However, if the input could be null, then return value could also be null. Therefore, you could change the signature to the following code:
```

```csharp
string? GetTopLevelDomainFromFullUrl(string? url);
```

That also works, but will often force callers to implement extra `null` checks. The contract is that the return value would be `null` only when the input argument `url` is `null`. To express that contract, you would annotate this method as shown in the following code:

```csharp
[return: NotNullIfNotNull("url")]
string? GetTopLevelDomainFromFullUrl(string? url);
```

> The return value and the argument have both been annotated with the `?` indicating that either could be `null`. The attribute further clarifies that the return value won't be null when the `url` argument isn't `null`. You specify conditional postconditions using these attributes:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The return value and the argument have both been annotated with the `?` indicating that either could be `null`. The attribute further clarifies that the return value won't be null when the `url` argument isn't `null`.

You specify conditional postconditions using these attributes:
```

- [MaybeNullWhen](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.MaybeNullWhenAttribute): A non-nullable `out` or `ref` argument may be null when the return value satisfies a condition.
- [NotNullWhen](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.NotNullWhenAttribute): A nullable `out` or `ref` argument may not be null when the return value satisfies a condition.

> - [NotNullIfNotNull](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.NotNullIfNotNullAttribute): a string return value isn't null when the input string argument isn't null.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- [NotNullIfNotNull](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.NotNullIfNotNullAttribute): A return value isn't null if the input argument for the specified parameter isn't null.
```

## Generic definitions and nullability

Correctly communicating the null state of generic types and generic methods requires special care. This stems from the fact that a nullable value type and a nullable reference type are fundamentally different. An `int?` is a synonym for `Nullable<int>`, whereas `string?` is `string` with an attribute added by the compiler. The result is that the compiler can't generate correct code for `T?` without knowing if `T` is a `class` or a `struct`. 

> This doesn't mean you can use a nullable type (either value type or reference type) as the type argument for a closed generic type. Both `List<string?>` and `List<int?>` are valid instantiations of `List<T>`. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This doesn't mean you can't use a nullable type (either value type or reference type) as the type argument for a closed generic type. Both `List<string?>` and `List<int?>` are valid instantiations of `List<T>`. 
```

What it does mean is that you can't use `T?` in a generic class or method declaration without constraints. For example, <xref:System.Linq.Enumerable.FirstOrDefault%60%601(System.Collections.Generic.IEnumerable%7B%60%600%7D)?displayProperty=nameWithType> won't be changed to return `T?`. You can overcome this limitation by adding either the `struct` or `class` constraint. With either of those constraints, the compiler knows how to generate code for both `T` and `T?`.

> You may want to restrict the types used for a generic type argument to be non-nullable types. You can do that by adding the `notnull` constraint on that type argument. When that attribute is applied, the type argument must not be a nullable type.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
You may want to restrict the types used for a generic type argument to be non-nullable types. You can do that by adding the `notnull` constraint on that type argument. When that constraint is applied, the type argument must not be a nullable type.
```

## Conclusions

Adding nullable reference types provides an initial vocabulary to describe your APIs expectations for variables that could be `null`. The additional attributes provide a richer vocabulary to describe the null state of variables as preconditions and postconditions. These attributes more clearly describe your expectations and provide a better experience for the developers using your APIs.

As you update libraries for a nullable context, add these attributes to guide users of your APIs to the correct usage. These attributes help you fully describe the null-state of input arguments and return values:

> - [AllowNull](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.DisallowNullAttribute): A non-nullable input argument may be null.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- [AllowNull](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.AllowNullAttribute): A non-nullable input argument may be null.
```

> - [DisallowNull](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.AllowNullAttribute): A nullable input argument should never be null.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- [DisallowNull](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.DisallowNullAttribute): A nullable input argument should never be null.
```

- [MaybeNull](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.MaybeNullAttribute): A non-nullable return value may be null.
- [NotNull](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.NotNullAttribute): A nullable return value will never be null.
- [MaybeNullWhen](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.MaybeNullWhenAttribute): A non-nullable `out` or `ref` argument may be null when the return value satisfies a condition.
- [NotNullWhen](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.NotNullWhenAttribute): A nullable `out` or `ref` argument may not be null when the return value satisfies a condition.

> - [NotNullIfNotNull](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.NotNullIfNotNullAttribute): a string return value isn't null when the input string argument isn't null.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- [NotNullIfNotNull](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.NotNullIfNotNullAttribute): A return value isn't null if the input argument for the specified parameter isn't null.
```

- [NotNullWhen](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.NotNullWhenAttribute): A nullable `out` or `ref` argument may not be null when the return value satisfies a condition.
- [NotNullIfNotNull](xref:System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis.NotNullIfNotNullAttribute): a string return value isn't null when the input string argument isn't null.

## Generic definitions and nullability

Correctly communicating the null state of generic types and generic methods requires special care. This stems from the fact that a nullable value type and a nullable reference type are fundamentally different. An `int?` is a synonym for `Nullable<int>`, whereas `string?` is `string` with an attribute added by the compiler. The result is that the compiler can't generate correct code for `T?` without knowing if `T` is a `class` or a `struct`. 

This doesn't mean you can use a nullable type (either value type or reference type) as the type argument for a closed generic type. Both `List<string?>` and `List<int?>` are valid instantiations of `List<T>`. 

> What it does mean is that you can't use `T?` in a generic class or method declaration without constraints. For example, <xref:System.Linq.Enumerable%601(System.Collections.Generic.IEnumerable%601)?displayProperty=nameWithType> won't be changed to return `T?`. You can overcome this limitation by adding either the `struct` or `class` constraint. With either of those constraints, the compiler knows how to generate code for both `T` and `T?`.

Reviewer: The link here is broken, and I'm not sure of the correct syntax for a closed generic type. Perhaps do it as `[Enumerable<IEnumerable>](xref:System.collectionsGeneric.IEnumerable?601)`?

Author: trying one other technique. (I don't know either)

You may want to restrict the types used for a generic type argument to be non-nullable types. You can do that by adding the `notnull` constraint on that type argument. When that attribute is applied, the type argument must not be a nullable type.

## Conclusions

> Adding nullable reference types provides an initial vocabulary to describe your APIs expectations for if variables could be `null`. The additional attributes provide a richer vocabulary to describe the null state of variables as preconditions and postconditions. These attributes more clearly describe your expectations and provide a better experience for the developers using your APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding nullable reference types provides an initial vocabulary to describe your APIs expectations for variables that could be `null`. The additional attributes provide a richer vocabulary to describe the null state of variables as preconditions and postconditions. These attributes more clearly describe your expectations and provide a better experience for the developers using your APIs.
```
